turns out rather hard to film in snow
and rain we're constantly having to
protect the camera that's exactly
reducer Alex and poor jack is constantly
cleaning the front this is a salami
ecclesia in iceland one of almost 270
that define the landscape and in fact
the name of this volcanic island in the
north atlantic glassy is like this cover
a tenth of the planet's land surface and
with 24 million cubic kilometers of
water locked up as ice that 70% of the
planet's fresh water in them but they're
receding take so Homer Yahoo for example
and what it exposes is potentially
interesting and more worrying than just
water and although it may look harmless
enough this ice could be hiding a deadly
secret cryogenically preserved bacteria
and viruses that could be hundreds of
thousands of years old dating from the
same time that mammoths and
saber-toothed cats roamed the planet in
fact thanks to the way it forms glacial
ice is pretty good at preserving
ecological and environmental collisions
as snow falls it traps air water and
living things while recently living
things and then as more and more snow
falls over the years those layers get
compacted and they form solid ice and
they trap that water that air and that
biological material in place the further
you go down the glassy or the older
stuff gets so at the top couple of
decades old but as you go further and
further those layers that biological
material thousands of years older and
it's trapped down there right now
nothing to worry about
but when it starts unfreezing that's
when it could get scary in a remote part
of Siberia in 2016 a 12 year old boy
died and lots of other people were
hospitalized because they were infected
by an anthrax bacteria that likely came
from a long dead reindeer that had
thawed out of the permafrost now
permafrost forms very much like a glass
here but it's about frozen soil layers
and layers of soil building up over time
over years
freezing in place so the further down
you go the older that stuff is the top
layer will likely melt and thaw in
summer but the deeper layers stay frozen
in almost a cryogenic stasis the problem
is that with the Arctic experiencing
warmer and warmer temperatures
permafrost is melting to a deeper and
deeper layer and scientists are worried
that the anthrax from that long dead
reindeer could just be the tip of the
iceberg with permafrost melting it may
start uncovering the graves of smallpox
Spanish flu bubonic plague victims and
possibly the pathogens that killed them
so yet another impact of continued
global warming those 18th and 19th
century diseases that we thought we'd
see in the back of maybe not although
permafrost could preserve microorganisms
that a few hundreds of years old
glassy is like some Homer yukl here
could be preserving pathogens that are
way way older and sometimes it's think
that there'd be a way to revive them
amazingly they have been able to
repeatedly revive in active and dormant
bacteria there are hundreds of thousands
of years old the ones that our ancestors
Homo erectus and Neanderthals would have
been exposed to and in one amazing case
bacterium dating back 8 million years
was revived from it's icy slumber what's
really scary is that as modern-day
humans have never had to face these
primal microbes so we just don't know
what they would do to us one shred of
hope though is that the bacteria that
are particularly adept at surviving this
cryogenic process tend to live in cold
environments so it's very unlikely that
they would thrive in our warm blooded
bodies so you don't need to be worried
then about being infected by an ancient
super virus well sadly I'm not done yet
the release of microorganisms from
melting glaciers could have another
unexpected effect alright get this the
sheer quantity of microbes locked up in
the ice caps and glassy is all around
the world is thought to total more than
1,000 times the biomass of all the
humans on earth it's spring here in
beautiful Iceland as you can tell can
the government lives on Meehan about
five or six layers what
seeing his chunks coming off the glacier
and being blown and pushed down the
rivers to the sea but with continued
global warming this could happen more
and more and the biomass that it
contains could severely disrupt the
aquatic ecosystems even if they're not
alive all that bacteria represents a
whole source of new nutrients in the
ocean that's likely to cause a big
planktonic bloom microscopic floating
algae proliferating in one concentrated
area using up the oxygen in the water
which means that fish and other oxygen
breathers wouldn't be able to survive so
perhaps there's little to be worried
about from the potential pathogens in
the ice they need to be revived they
need to be able to survive in our warm
bodies and need to actually be harmful
to us the world the planet faces a much
bigger problem
thanks to continued global warming right
now the Arctic is warming three times
faster than some other places around the
world and if that warming continues then
glassier is like so home yukl here will
continue to melt and we may need to get
used to things
emerging from the ice do you fancy
coming on an adventure like this if the
answer is yes and I'm sure it is then
you need to check out this video because
we have just launched the BBC Earth
presenter search 2018 also have a look
at all the other videos that we've been
making here in incredible Iceland if
you're not subscribed to the channel
please do hit the notification bell
you'll be the first to hear about our
latest videos and if you do win that by
the way make sure you pack warm stuff
could it is incredibly cool